Edit + netket (#1)
mpi4jax/mpi4jax-joss: paper.md

# Summary

The tensor framework JAX [@jax] combines expressivity and performance while providing an accessible pure Python interface.
In particular, JAX is expressive due to its clean, functional design, and performant due to a powerful JIT (just-in-time) compiler.

However, machine learning and (high-performance) scientific computing are often conducted on different hardware stacks: Machine learning is typically done on few highly parallel units (GPUs or TPUs) connected to a single host CPU, while scientific models tend to run on clusters of dozens to thousands of CPUs.

> Unfortunately, support from JAX and the underlying compiler XLA is much more mature in the former case.

Reviewer: I think this is on the roadmap somewhere for JAX, so "more mature" seems to be more appropriate.

Author: agree.

# Summary

The tensor framework JAX [@jax] combines expressivity and performance while retaining an accessible pure Python interface.

> Expressivity is achieved by treating functions as first-class objects, while efficiency is obtained by compiling to machine code Just-Ahead-Of-Time.

Reviewer: > Expressivity is achieved by treating functions as first-class objects

It is more than that, isn't it? I called it "functional design" which for me encompasses first-class functions + higher-order functions + pure functions.

Author: It's about jargon, again, i think.
First-class objects means you can operate on them as you would operate on anything else.

I personally think that `higher order functions` it's somewhat an outdated concept. If you can pass a function as an argument, then you automatically have those.

If they are first-class objects of course you can pass them to functions.
But i'm not a computer scientist...

Pure functions is unrelated and it's simply a tool for helping the optimiser.

Reviewer: > Pure functions is unrelated and it's simply a tool for helping the optimiser.

It's also increasing expressivity, isn't it? Because you don't need to worry about internal state.

Anyhow, how about a compromise: We keep this, but change JAOT to JIT? (I agree that JIT might not be technically correct, but it's what the community is familiar with.)

Reviewer: Whatever, JAOT is OK, too.

- In the case of Veros, MPI primitives are needed to communicate overlapping grid cells between processes. Communication primitives are buried deep into the physical subroutines. Therefore, refactoring the codebase to leave `jax.jit` every time data needs to be communicated would severely break the control flow of the model and incur a hefty performance loss (in addition to the cost of copying data from and to JAX). Through `mpi4jax`, it is possible to apply the JIT compiler to whole subroutines to avoid this entirely.

- In the case of NetKet, a high efficiency algorithm for natural gradient optimization requires finding the solution of a large linear system $A x= y $. The matrix $A$ is determined by running automatic differentiation on a neural network model whose inputs might be distributed across several computing nodes and GPUs. Therefore, the need to differentiate through distributed reduction operations inside of a linear solver arises.

# Implementation

`mpi4jax` combines JAX's custom call mechanism with `mpi4py.libmpi` (which exposes MPI C primitives as Cython callables).

The implementation of a primitive in `mpi4jax` consists of two parts:

> 1. A Python module, registering a new primitive with JAX. JAX primitives consist of an _abstract evaluation_ rule and several _translation rules_. The former is used by the compiler to infer the output shapes and data types without running the actual computation, while _translation rules_ determine the specific computational kernel and prepare the input buffers. A different _translation rule_ is necessary for every type of backend, such as CPUs, GPUs and TPUs.

Reviewer: duplicate: (see next paragraph)

> A different translation rule is necessary for every type of backend, such as CPUs, GPUs and TPUs.

# Summary

The tensor framework JAX [@jax] combines expressivity and performance while retaining an accessible pure Python interface.

> Expressivity is achieved by treating functions as first-class objects, while efficiency is obtained by compiling to machine code Just-Ahead-Of-Time.

Reviewer: Any particular reason why you insist on Just-Ahead-Of-Time? JAX itself calls it just-in-time:

> JAX is Autograd and XLA, brought together for high-performance numerical computing and machine learning research. It provides composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs: differentiate, vectorize, parallelize, Just-In-Time compile to GPU/TPU, and more.

Author: It's probably jargon i got from meddling in the julia world, though I heard it when chatting with a few Computer scientists too..

Traditionally JIT languages are compiled during runtime and executed inside a Virtraul Machine.
Like Java, that executes the code in the VM until a function is hit ~30 times, at which points he compiles it and subsequent invocations will run the machine code instead of in the VM.

Jax (like julia) does not do that: it's not even a dynamic language (it just fakes it).
jax compiles code like gcc would, generates an ASM blob that is fed to the relevant device.
This is AOT, not JIT.

It's just that the compilation is postponed to the last possible moment: when you need the result.

Author: Apparently according to wiipedia

> Julia uses a just-in-time (JIT) compiler that is referred to as "just-ahead-of-time" (JAOT) in the Julia community, as Julia compiles all code (by default) to machine code before running it.[23][24]

I'm okay if you want to revert it.
But i stand by my ideas.

The implementation of a primitive in `mpi4jax` consists of two parts:

1. A Python module, registering a new primitive with JAX. JAX primitives consist of an _abstract evaluation_ rule and several _translation rules_. The former is used by the compiler to infer the output shapes and data types without running the actual computation, while _translation rules_ determine the specific computational kernel and prepare the input buffers. A different _translation rule_ is necessary for every type of backend, such as CPUs, GPUs and TPUs.

> On specific primitives we also define the _transposition rule_ in order to support reverse mode Automatic Differentiation.

Reviewer: This should come after the next paragraph, as it directly relates to the translation rules described before.

In this paper, we introduced `mpi4jax`, which allows zero-copy communication of JAX-owned data. `mpi4jax` provides an implementation of the most important MPI operations in a way that is usable from JAX compiled code.

However, JAX is much more than just a JIT compiler: by providing powerful tools for automatic differentiation (`jax.vjp` and `jax.jvp`) and auto-vectorization (`jax.vmap`), it is a full-fledged Differentiable Programming framework. 
Differentiable programming in particular is a promising new paradigm to combine advances in machine learning and physical modelling [@diffprog1; @diffprog2], and being able to freely distribute those models among different nodes will allow even more powerful algorithms.

> So far, `mpi4jax` only supports differentiating through global sums via the `allreduce` primitive, the main operation occurring in distributed linear algebra. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure I'm buying this. How is it the main operation? Maybe call it the main operation in distributed matrix-vector products?

In this paper, we introduced `mpi4jax`, which allows zero-copy communication of JAX-owned data. `mpi4jax` provides an implementation of the most important MPI operations in a way that is usable from JAX compiled code.

However, JAX is much more than just a JIT compiler. It is also a full-fledged differentiable programming framework by providing powerful tools for automatic differentiation (e.g. via `jax.grad`, `jax.vjp`, and `jax.jvp`). Differentiable programming is a promising new paradigm to combine advances in machine learning and physical modelling [@diffprog1; @diffprog2], and being able to freely distribute those models among different nodes will allow for even more powerful applications.

> So far, `mpi4jax` only supports differentiating through global sums via the `allreduce` primitive (one of the main operations occurring in distributed linear algebra).
> However, it should be possible with some additional work to compute the gradients of generic send / receive operations, by propagating gradients through several processes.

Author: ```suggestion
So far, `mpi4jax` only supports differentiating through global sums via the `allreduce` primitive (one of the main operations used in distributed matrix-vector products) and combined send and receive (`sendrecv`) operations in forward and reverse mode.
```

Assuming we get the PR merged

In this paper, we introduced `mpi4jax`, which allows zero-copy communication of JAX-owned data. `mpi4jax` provides an implementation of the most important MPI operations in a way that is usable from JAX compiled code.

> However, JAX is much more than just a JIT compiler. It is also a full-fledged differentiable programming framework by providing powerful tools for automatic differentiation (e.g. via `jax.grad`, `jax.vjp`, and `jax.jvp`). Differentiable programming is a promising new paradigm to combine advances in machine learning and physical modelling [@diffprog1; @diffprog2], and being able to freely distribute those models among different nodes will allow for even more powerful applications.

Reviewer: "powerful" twice in this paragraph, maybe remove one

So far, `mpi4jax` only supports differentiating through global sums via the `allreduce` primitive (one of the main operations used in distributed matrix-vector products) and combined send and receive (`sendrecv`) operations in forward and reverse mode.

> This would eventually enable fully differentiable, distributed physical simulations without additional user code.

Reviewer: Outdated sentence
